 
 
1. Interlinkages between Energy and other SDGs  
Since the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development was conceived to be integrated and indivisible, the 
SDGs are interlinked and interdependent by design. Hence, SDG Interlinkages refer to the complex network 
of interconnections among goals, targets and indicators. Actions toward one SDG can have positive or 
negative impacts on others, varying across geographical and temporal scales. Understanding this 
complexity and the directionality of change is key for achieving the Agenda while safeguarding against 
unintended SDG deterioration (JCR Website). This approach facilitates the creation of integrated solutions 
that drive simultaneous progress across multiple SDGs by maximizing synergies and minimizing trade-offs, 
which aids in optimizing resources and accelerating response times. 
UNDP's Strategic Plan 2022-2025 embraces integrated development solutions, grounded in a "3x6x3" 
framework. This comprehensive structure encompasses three Directions of Change—structural 
transformation, leaving no one behind, and building resilience—guiding systemic transformations beyond 
2025. Within this framework, UNDP focuses on six Signature Solutions: poverty and inequality, gender 
equality, energy, environment, resilience, and governance, each aimed at addressing specific challenges 
and fostering sustainable development. Additionally, three Enablers—digitalization, strategic innovation, 
and development financing—work synergistically to maximize development impact, supporting inclusive, 
ethical, and sustainable societies while aligning capital flows with the SDGs, for scaled-up finance 
mobilization.  
Understanding the interlinkages between Sustainable Energy for Development and the SDGs facilitates the 
creation of strategies addressing multiple Signature Solutions. By leveraging synergies and circumventing 
trade-offs, the impact is maximized toward the Directions of Change while optimizing budgets. Diverse 
tools aid decision-makers in identifying these connections, employing visual mapping methods to illustrate 
interlinkages among different SDGs, showcasing both positive and negative causal relations. Examples of 
such tools include the JRC SDG Interlinkages Tool, the SDG Interlinkages Analysis & Visualization Tool or 
the UNESCAP Methodology for the integration of SDGs into National Planning. While these tools 
consolidate available data into valuable insights, bridging the data gap remains a priority and a key strategy 
for holistic integrated development solutions targeting SDG interlinkages. Notably, data collected at the 
national level can drive inclusive energy transitions policies shaped by local contexts and realities. 
Anchoring solutions in comprehensive and inclusive data prevents the exacerbation of existing 
inequalities, with digital solutions emerging as strategic enablers that span diverse Signature Solutions for 
sustainable development. 
 
 
 
This chapter unpacks the main synergies and trade-off for each of the SDG 7 outcome target: achieving 
universal access to energy and clean cooking (SDG 7.1), fostering the adoption of renewable energy (SDG 
7.2), and transitioning toward energy-efficient consumption (SDG 7.3). It features case studies developed 
by UNDP and relevant UN agencies, showcasing efforts to leverage synergies or counteract trade-offs. 
Highlighted are the connections of these solutions with the 3x6x3 framework, emphasizing the involved 
Signature Solutions, Key Enablers, and advanced Direction of Change. 
 
Tools for SDGs interlinkage visualization:  
JRC SDG Interlinkages Tool: Developed by the SDG team at the Joint Research Centre (JRC), this tool 
comprehensively assesses the interconnectedness within the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development. It relies on a meticulous methodology involving extensive literature reviews, curating a 
database from 92 selected publications since the adoption of the 2030 Agenda in 2015. The database 
meticulously documents clear interlinkages between different SDG goals, targets, or indicators, aiding 
policymakers by providing crucial insights to navigate and anticipate interactions among SDGs. This 
tool presents interlinkages at goal and target levels and offers advanced search capabilities for specific 
regions, methods of analysis, and directionalities. 
SDG Interlinkages Analysis & Visualization Tool: Developed by the Institute for Global Environmental 
Strategies, this interactive tool presents causal relationships between relevant SDG targets for 27 
countries in Asia and Africa. It utilizes statistical analysis of time-series data for indicators, enhancing 
network analysis techniques to showcase potential synergies and trade-offs between the SDG targets. 
Country-specific dashboards offer insights into the structure of interlinkages networks from a systemic 
perspective, aiding in understanding the dynamics between SDGs at a granular level. 
UNESCAP Methodology for the integration of SDGs into National Planning: Developed by UNESCAP, 
this methodology facilitates the analysis of interlinkages between SDGs using a system thinking 
approach. Launched in 2016, it focuses on understanding and analyzing the directionality and strength 
of interlinkages within and across specific SDG targets. Utilizing causal loop diagrams, it highlights 
positive and reinforcing relationships between interlinked SDG targets, aiding in synchronized and 
integrated SDG implementation planning. The tool focuses on Asia and the Pacific, mapping causal 
relations to enhance analysis of SDG interconnectedness. 
 
  
 
