 
 
attention to trade-offs such as water stress, land use conflicts, life cycle environmental impacts and 
governance issues, emphasizing community rights and sustainability. This section highlights complexities 
in renewable energy's impacts and initiatives aiding comprehensive understanding of its effects. This 
section explores renewable energy's complexities and includes case studies for a comprehensive 
understanding of its impacts. 
1.2.1. Advancing Sustainable Prosperity with Renewable Energy 
Clean Energy for Climate Action: Accelerating the penetration of renewable energy aligns with the Paris 
Agreement's goal of limiting global warming to below 2°C (SDG 13) (ICSU, 2017).  Renewable energy 
sources are less water-intensive than conventional sources, which is highly relevant amid water scarcity 
and erratic flows caused by climate change. The global energy system used 10% of total global freshwater 
withdrawals in 2021, due to the essential role of water in the energy supply chain, from electricity 
generation to fossil fuel production (IEA, 2023). The IEA’s Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario predicts a 
nearly 15% decline in water use within the power sector due to transitioning from coal to solar PV and 
wind energy.  
Replacing off-shore petroleum extraction by renewable energy generated from offshore wind, wave and 
tidal power farms can contribute to conserving and sustainably using marine resources (SDG 14). 
Upscaling of renewables will help decrease ocean acidification (via lower carbon emissions), accidental 
impacts from energy-production and transport activities on aquatic habitats, and marine thermal 
pollution from cooling at coastal power plants (ICSU, 2017).   
Healthier Cities and Resilient Societies: The use of renewable energy resources directly reduces air 
pollution. Improving air quality, and by extension human health, is especially important for those living in 
the dense urban centers of rapidly developing countries (SDG 3) (ICSU, 2017). Resilient infrastructure, 
inclusive industrialization, and innovation (SDG 9) are prerequisites for achieving the SDG 7.2 target (ICSU, 
2017).  Clean energy systems, in particular, create the conditions for cities and human settlements to be 
inclusive, safe, resilient, less-polluting, and more sustainable (SDG 11). An up-scaling of renewable energy 
can have a large impact on the sustainability of cities and communities. Similarly, sustainable urban 
planning, transport, and housing are key for achieving SDG 7.2, since renewable solutions are fundamental 
pillars of the solutions portfolio. Smart grids and energy communities facilitate the development of 
renewable energy at the domestic or neighborhood scale (ICSU, 2017). Furthermore, decentralized 
renewable energy sources enhance resilience. This is exemplified by the City Energy Resilience 
Framework, developed by the Resilient Cities Network (R-Cities) and Urban Power (Box 8). 
 
 
 
Inclusive Working Opportunities: Renewable energy deployment bolsters innovation and reinforces local, 
regional, and national employment objectives (SDG 8). The global renewable energy sector employs 12.7 
million people, with significant growth in solar PV, primarily in Asia accounting for 79% of the global total. 
Wind and hydropower, as well as liquid biofuels make up most of the rest of the growth in renewable 
energy jobs. China dominates employment in most renewable energy sectors, however Brazil has the 
most biofuel jobs (WEF, 2023). While gender parity remains low in the renewable energy sector and 
technical positions, companies with at least 30% female leadership yield higher profit margins and are 
more inclined to invest in sustainability and environmental initiatives (SDGs, 2022).  Renewable energy’s 
value chain presents new opportunities, particularly for women (SDG 5), as greater gender diversity has 
shown to enhance both effectiveness and financial performance. A fair energy transition is essential for 
equalizing opportunities in employment and leadership roles, emphasizing the importance of access to 
quality jobs and finance in empowering women and their families (UN Women). UNDP-supported 
initiatives in Peru (Box 9) and Yemen (Box 10) showcase women's impact as clean energy promotors. 
 
Case Study 2: RBLAC: e-Mujer, the Energy School for Women. 
Case Study: RBLAC: e-Mujer, the Energy School for Women 
Location: Perú 
https://undp-climate.exposure.co/empowered-women  
 
In Peru, e-Mujer, the Energy School for Women. This pilot project, funded by the Global 
Environment Facility and implemented by the Peruvian Ministry of Energy and Mines and the 
United Nations Development Programme, trains rural women to use, install, maintain, and 
commercialize clean energy systems such as solar panels and improved cookstoves. 
 
 
 
Box 8: The City Energy Resilience Framework (CERF) serves as a comprehensive guide for cities to 
bolster their energy transition and urban resilience. It encompasses aspects of electricity 
infrastructure, clean energy, equitable service access, emergency management, and recovery 
strategies. As an engagement tool, CERF unites stakeholders to evaluate challenges and opportunities 
for resilient energy systems based on local policies and initiatives. By highlighting global examples, 
CERF encourages dialogue on adopting multi-benefit energy solutions that empower urban 
communities to adapt and thrive amidst adversities. 
