 
 
 
 
 
2. Approaches, Methods and Tools for Strategic Innovation 
This chapter explores ways to uncover system interconnections and foster integration across the SDGs. It 
aims at equipping participants with an understanding of why a focus on system interconnections is key for 
achieving sustainable development, what coherent policymaking entails, and what are some specific 
approaches, methods and tools that can be employed to foster SDGs interlinkages. Approaches are 
intended to guide the overarching strategy, methods define the step-by-step procedures, and tools provide 
the means to execute those procedures effectively within the chosen approach and method. For instance, 
the UNDP’s Knowledge Bank offers a one-stop-shop resource platform, including the SDG Integration tools 
and the SDG Acceleration Toolkit by the UNSDG, serving as a comprehensive support hub for achieving 
the Global Goals (SDG Acceleration Toolkit) 
TAKE-HOME MESSAGES 
• 
Access to electricity and clean cooking acts as a catalyst for achieving multiple SDGs, 
facilitating educational opportunities, bridging the digital divide, transforming health services, 
addressing water stress, bolstering food security and productive development, and narrowing 
the gender gaps. Special attention must be given to balancing energy affordability and 
sufficiency, ensuring sustainable battery management, and applying an inclusive, gender-
responsive lens to leave no one behind. 
• 
Renewable energies pave the way for sustainable prosperity, contributing to the 
synergistic fight against climate change, creating healthier cities, and fostering resilient 
societies. These technological solutions require a holistic approach to manage potential 
trade-offs, such as water security challenges, balancing land use and food security, 
considering the entire environmental footprint of the green energy value chain, and ensuring 
governance and community rights. 
• 
Energy efficiency represents a highly advantageous strategy capable of catalyzing 
sustainability by building sustainable societies, optimizing the water-food-energy nexus, 
transforming the energy sector and industry through waste-to-energy solutions and 
digitalization. However, attention is needed to avoid development degrowth, to mitigate 
scaled impacts of large-scale initiatives such as nature-based solutions, to engage society 
through capacity-building and reduce inequalities through digitalization. 
